VT-Intrinsic: Physics-Based Decomposition of Reﬂectance and Shading
using a Single Visible-Thermal Image Pair
Zeqing Yuan
Mani Ramanagopal
Aswin C. Sankaranarayanan
Srinivasa G. Narasimhan
Carnegie Mellon University
https://vt-intrinsic.github.io
Ordinality
Retexturing
Relighting
…
Applications
Albedo & Shading Networks
(Randomly Initialized)
Fixed Random Maps 
Local / 
Non-local
!
❄
Optimization
Double-DIP Parameterization
Input Visible
Input Thermal
Estimated Shading
Estimated Albedo
Edge
Albedo / Shading Constraints
Point Pair
Figure 1.
Through the tree’s veil, sunlight weaves intricate shadows across a building fac¸ade. Visible and thermal images capture
complementary cues of the reﬂected and absorbed light. Local and non-local visible–thermal ordinalities (Sec. 3) reveal albedo-/shading-
dominant edges and point-pair ordinalities respectively, guiding an optimization using Double-DIP parameterization (Sec. 4). Our
physics-based method reconstructs the complex shading and albedo without learned priors, whereas state-of-the-art models fail (see
supplementary). The decomposition enables faithful retexturing and relighting via albedo and shading editing.
Abstract
Decomposing a scene into its reﬂectance and shading is
a challenge due to the lack of extensive ground-truth data
for real-world scenes. We introduce a novel physics-based
approach for intrinsic image decomposition using a pair of
visible and thermal images. We leverage the principle that
light not reﬂected from an opaque surface is absorbed and
detected as heat by a thermal camera. This allows us to relate
the ordinalities (or relative magnitudes) between visible and
thermal image intensities to the ordinalities of shading and
reﬂectance. The ordinalities enable dense self-supervision
of an optimizing neural network to recover shading and re-
ﬂectance. We perform quantitative evaluations with known
reﬂectance and shading under natural and artiﬁcial light-
ing, and qualitative experiments across diverse scenes. The
results demonstrate superior performance over both physics-
based and recent learning-based methods, providing a path
toward scalable real-world data curation with supervision.
1. Introduction
Understanding how a scene appears from the interaction be-
tween surface reﬂectance (the intrinsic material color, often
approximated as diffuse albedo) and incident illumination
(shading determined by lighting and geometry) has long
been a central pursuit in vision and imaging sciences [3].
Disentangling these physical factors is useful for various ap-
plications in graphics (recoloring, relighting, and composit-
ing) and vision (object recognition and tracking). Recent
learning-based methods have made progress by formulating
this task in an end-to-end framework and inferring statisti-
cal priors from auxiliary datasets to constrain the otherwise
ill-posed inverse problem [17]. However, collecting ground-
truth data for real-world scenes remains infeasible, as mea-
suring surface reﬂectance and shading requires specialized
equipment and controlled procedures [19, 42].
In this paper, we introduce a novel physics-based frame-
work that leverages a single auxiliary thermal image to de-
compose a visible image of a scene into its albedo and shad-
1
This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.
41752


ing components. To see why a thermal image is useful here,
we consider the underlying physical principles that govern
albedo and shading. Shading corresponds to the total inci-
dent energy (or irradiance) at a scene point, while albedo
represents the proportion of that energy reﬂected by the
surface. For opaque objects, the unreﬂected portion of the
incident energy is absorbed, which contributes to the ther-
mal radiation. This radiation can be detected by a thermal
camera in the long-wave infrared range (8–14 µm). A recent
technique called JoLHT-Video [34] addressed this issue by
modeling heat transport equations and estimating it from the
transient heat ﬂow observed by a thermal video. However,
directly estimating the absorbed light is challenging as it
requires controlled and visible-only lighting and transient
thermal measurements from video, Inspired by this work,
we pose the following question: What can be achieved using
only a single thermal image?
Since absorption of light increases the temperature of
an object, low-albedo regions—dark in the visible im-
age—appear bright in the thermal image, whereas shading
variations appear bright in both. Based on this observa-
tion, we relate visible–thermal intensity ordinalities between
any two scene points to their albedo and shading ordinali-
ties, without having to estimate the absorbed light. Specif-
ically, the ordinality of neighboring scene points classiﬁes
edges as shading- or reﬂectance-dominant and deﬁnes an
edge loss, while non-local ordinalities yield a point-pair loss.
These new losses are used, together with the standard visible-
image reconstruction loss, to optimize a neural network (e.g.,
Double Deep Image Prior [16], randomly initialized to pa-
rameterize albedo and shading), effectively providing dense
self-supervision for intrinsic decomposition.
Our ordinality theory is derived using the Lambertian
assumption and when illumination is conﬁned to the vis-
ible spectrum (e.g., LED lighting). We further extend it
to broadband sources containing infrared energy (e.g., sun-
light, incandescent bulbs) by empirically observing—and
statistically validating with [22]—that infrared albedo ex-
hibits lower variation across common materials than visible
albedo [9], thereby preserving ordinalities. Expert validation
on diverse materials and natural scenes—including those
moderately violating the Lambertian assumption—shows
near-perfect agreement between our automatically estimated
point-pair ordinalities and conﬁdent expert labels, conﬁrm-
ing robustness across material types and generalization be-
yond idealized conditions.
We quantitatively evaluate our method on scenes with
known reﬂectance (e.g. color charts) and known shading
(e.g. object imaged under identical lighting but painted dif-
ferently). We further test on visible-thermal pairs simulated
from the MIT Intrinsic dataset [19]. Finally, we demon-
strate qualitative results on complex indoor and outdoor
scenes with notable improvements over both physics-based
and learning-based methods trained on auxiliary datasets.
Our dataset of visible-thermal image pairs can also provide
supervision for learning methods in real-world scenes.
Limitations: Our method assumes dominant diffuse re-
ﬂection, heat arising primarily from light absorption, and
the absence of multiple colored illuminations. Performance
can also be affected by the limited SNR and resolution of
inexpensive microbolometer thermal cameras, particularly
under weak illumination or in dynamic scenes. Despite these
limitations, as thermal cameras improve and become more
ubiquitous, understanding the interplay between light and
heat holds strong potential for vision and graphics.
2. Related Work
2.1. Thermal Imaging for Physics-Based Vision
Thermal cameras have recently emerged as a powerful com-
plement to visible sensing across geometry [32, 33, 39],
materials [12], and appearance [2].
JoLHT-Video [34] showed that transient thermal video
provides analytical cues for estimating absorbed and re-
ﬂected light. However, it relies on (i) active lighting con-
trol, infeasible in-the-wild, (ii) visible-only illumination that
excludes common sources (sun and incandescent bulbs),
and (iii) radiometric calibration between visible and thermal
cameras. In contrast, our method uses a single steady-state
thermal image to extract reliable ordinal constraints without
requiring video, calibration or lighting control.
2.2. Intrinsic Image Decomposition (IID)
Early optimization-based approaches: Retinex-style [25]
methods rely on stringent assumptions that hinder gen-
eralization—such as smooth shading or reﬂectance [4],
chromaticity-preserving shading variations [11, 14, 18], or
local intensity similarity implying shared reﬂectance [37].
Learning-based approaches: Unsupervised learning based
methods that decorrelate albedo and shading [29] or that
enforce albedo consistency across changing illumination
[27] improve upon hand-crafted priors. Supervised learning-
based models are primarily trained on synthetic datasets [24,
26, 28, 35], which provide ground-truth albedo and shading
but face a signiﬁcant sim-to-real gap. Existing real-world
datasets [5, 23, 42] offer sparse annotations used by models
(e.g., to predict albedo ordinalities [44]), but are limited to
small-scale indoor scenes. Intrinsic-v1 [6] expands to more
diverse data by using model predictions as pseudo-ground
truth, albeit imperfectly. Recent works [21, 30, 43] leverage
diffusion priors for IID, yet as noted in [7], they suffer from
hallucination.
Using auxiliary sensors: Cheng et al. [8] used near-infrared
(NIR) images as shading proxies, but NIR albedo often varies
across materials (albeit less than visible) and modern ef-
ﬁcient lighting such as LEDs hardly emits NIR, limiting
41753


Visible
Thermal
Edges
Points
Shading
Albedo
Figure 2. Printed (top) vs. projected (bottom) Roger Shepard’s
illusion [38]. Top: a printed paper lit by an incandescent bulb,
where reﬂectance variations reveal a saxophone player. Bottom:
the same pattern projected onto a uniform cardboard, where mod-
ulated shading reveals a lady’s face. This comparison highlights
the albedo-shading ambiguity and motivates modeling light–heat
transport: reﬂectance induces inverse visible–thermal ordinalities,
while shading yields consistent ones. Columns 3-4 show classiﬁed
albedo- / shading-dominant edges (Sec. 3.1.1) and points of lower
albedo / higher shading than
(Sec. 3.1.2). Our method decom-
poses correctly (right), whereas baselines fail (see supplementary).
generality and applicability. Sato et al. [36] used intensity
of sparse LiDAR returns and enforce consistency with esti-
mated albedos, yet LIDAR operates in NIR where albedo
differs from visible [8]. While such NIR cues help in spe-
ciﬁc cases, our approach exploits the complementary relation
between visible (reﬂected light) and thermal (proxy for ab-
sorbed light), enabling broader applicability.
3. Theory of Visible-Thermal Ordinality
We present the theoretical relationship between a visible and
thermal image pair and show that the ordinality of their pixel
intensities directly convey the ordinality of the underlying
albedo or shading, as illustrated in Fig. 2. We ﬁrst consider
visible illumination (e.g., an LED), then extend our analysis
to include invisible illumination component (e.g., infrared
light in incandescent bulbs and sunlight).
3.1. Visible-only Illumination
Consider an opaque Lambertian scene imaged by visible and
thermal cameras. The visible intensity at a pixel x is:
Iv(x) = g⇢(x)⌘(x),
(1)
where ⇢is the albedo (reﬂectance), ⌘the shading (irradiance),
and g = k/⇡a global scale determined by the camera gain
k. For brevity, we omit x denoting a single pixel.
Light not reﬂected is absorbed by the surface and con-
verted into heat, producing a heat source of intensity:
H = (1 −⇢)⌘.
(2)
This heat propagates through conduction, convection and
radiation according to the heat transport equation. Though
H is not directly measurable, it can be inferred from sur-
face temperature, which is indirectly observed by a thermal
camera. JoLHT-Video [34] modeled the light-heat transport
using thermal video of the heating process to estimate H and
solve for ⇢and ⌘. In contrast, we use a single thermal image
It near thermal equilibrium, easily attainable within seconds
under stable lighting.
Together, Iv and the absorbed heat image H impose local
and non-local constraints on albedo and shading.
3.1.1. Local (Edge) Constraints
The spatial gradient of the visible image can be written as:
rIv = g(r⇢)⌘+ g⇢(r⌘).
(3)
For most edges in natural images, one of the two terms on the
right dominates—edges arise primarily from either albedo
or shading variations [18, 25]. This creates a fundamental
ambiguity, but the spatial gradients of the heat source provide
complementary information:
rH = (−r⇢)⌘+ (1 −⇢)r⌘.
(4)
From (3) and (4), we have
Albedo Edge(r⌘! 0): sign(rIv) = −sign(rH), (5a)
Shading Edge(r⇢! 0): sign(rIv) = sign(rH).
(5b)
This yields a simple criterion to distinguish albedo- and
shading-dominant edges using the heat intensity image.
3.1.2. Non-Local (Point-Pair) Constraints
We generalize the above gradient analysis to compare point
pairs, i.e., any two distinct pixels xi and xj in the scene.
Iv(xi) = g⇢(xi)⌘(xi), H(xi) = (1 −⇢(xi))⌘(xi), (6a)
Iv(xj) = g⇢(xj)⌘(xj), H(xj) = (1 −⇢(xj))⌘(xj). (6b)
When a pixel’s visible intensity is lower (or higher) than
another’s while its thermal intensity is higher (or lower), the
pixel’s albedo is correspondingly lower (or higher).
Proposition 1 (Albedo Ordinality). For pixels xi, xj with
visible and heat intensities as in (6), if Iv(xi) < Iv(xj) and
H(xi) > H(xj), then ⇢(xi) < ⇢(xj), and vice versa.
Conversely, when both visible and heat intensities are
lower (or higher), its shading is also lower (or higher).
Proposition 2 (Shading Ordinality). For pixels xi, xj with
visible and thermal intensities as in (6), if Iv(xi) < Iv(xj)
and H(xi) < H(xj), then ⌘(xi) < ⌘(xj), and vice versa.
Proofs for Prop. 1 and Prop. 2 are in the supplementary.
The ordinalities here rely on H, the heat from absorbed
visible light. Next, we incorporate invisible light and relate
H to thermal image intensity, It.
41754


3.2. Visible and Invisible Illumination
Common light sources such as sunlight and incandescent
lamps emit signiﬁcant invisible radiation (e.g., infrared).
While the visible camera captures only reﬂected light within
its spectral response, heat generation arises from absorbed
energy across all wavelengths. Thus, the equation for the
heat source intensity has an additional term as follows:
H = (1 −⇢v)⌘+ (1 −⇢i) li
lv
⌘,
(7)
where ⇢i is the average albedo in the invisible band, li/lv is
the ratio of light intensity in the invisible and visible spectra.
While albedo variations are prominent in the visible spec-
trum, their counterparts in the infrared are much smaller [9].
Thus, we assume that ⇢i is locally constant within a region,
allowing (7) to be approximated as:
H = (β −⇢v)⌘,
s.t.
β = 1 + (1 −⇢i)li/lv.
(8)
As β is locally constant, (5b) still holds as rH is invariant
to a constant offset in H. Also, as β > 1, Prop. 1 and
Prop. 2 holds whenever β is same for the two points.
3.3. Relating heat intensity to a single thermal image
While heat intensity is not directly observable, we show that
a thermal image is a reliable proxy for ordinality constraints.
The heat transport equation at a surface point is:
Ch
@T
@t = H + hc(Ta −T) + 4✏σT 3
s (Ts −T) + ∆T, (9)
where Ch is the heat capacity, T the surface temperature, t
time, hc the convection coefﬁcient, Ta the air temperature, ✏
the surface emissivity, σ the Stefan-Boltzmann constant, Ts
the surrounding temperature, the thermal conductivity, and
∆denotes the Laplacian operator along the surface. A static
scene under constant lighting reaches thermal equilibrium
when the left side of (9) is zero, giving
H = (hc + 4✏σT 3
s )T −∆T −(hcTa + 4✏σT 4
s ).
(10)
The image intensity measurement Tt made by a thermal
camera is related to the temperature T as follows:
It = ✏U(T) + (1 −✏)U(Ts),
(11)
where U denotes the thermal camera’s response function.
Linearizing U as U(T) = p1T + p2 in (11), we get
T = a1It −a2
s.t. a1 =
1
✏p1
, a2 = p2 + p1Ts(1 −✏)
✏p1
.
(12)
Substituting (12) in (10), we get
H = c1It −c2∆It −c3,
(13)
where c1
=
hc+4✏σT 3
s
✏p1
, c2
=

✏p1 , and c3
= (hc +
4✏σT 3
s )( p2+p1Ts(1−✏)
✏p1
) + (hcTa + 4✏σT 4
s ).
The thermal properties such as ✏, and have small varia-
tions irrespective of the variation in albedo [41]. The envi-
ronmental variables such as hc, Ta, and Ts are also similar.
Therefore, c1, c2 and c3 are similar within a region. Also,
thermal conductivity of many common materials, excluding
metals, is low. Likewise, the Laplacian of a temperature ﬁeld
at steady state has a much smaller magnitude than absolute
temperatures [41]. Therefore, we ignore the conduction term.
Then, as c1 > 0, the ordinal relationships between H at two
points is the same as that of It.
Proposition 3. In local regions, c1, c2 and c3 are constant
so that for any two pixels xi, xj, if H(xi) is less (or more)
than H(xj), then It(xi) is also less (or more) than It(xj).
3.4. Ordinality of Albedo and Shading
Using Prop. 3, we can extend the results from Eq. 5b to use
thermal image intensities, as summarized below:
Albedo Edge(r⌘= 0): sign(rIv) = −sign(rIt),
(14a)
Shading Edge(r⇢= 0): sign(rIv) = sign(rIt).
(14b)
Similarly, we extend Prop. 1 and Prop. 2 to thermal image
intensities, yielding the following ordinal relationships:
Iv(xi) > Iv(xj), It(xi) > It(xj) ) ⌘(xi) > ⌘(xj),
(15a)
Iv(xi) < Iv(xj), It(xi) < It(xj) ) ⌘(xi) < ⌘(xj),
(15b)
Iv(xi) > Iv(xj), It(xi) < It(xj) ) ⇢(xi) > ⇢(xj),
(15c)
Iv(xi) < Iv(xj), It(xi) > It(xj) ) ⇢(xi) < ⇢(xj).
(15d)
4. Method
Using the ordinalities as loss functions, we optimize the
albedo and shading from a visible-thermal image pair. Let
Iv be a k−channel visible image and It be the corresponding
aligned thermal image. Let ˆ⇢and ˆ⌘be an estimate of the
k−channel albedo and grayscale shading. Let ¯Iv and ¯⇢be
the grayscale image and albedo estimate, respectively.
4.1. Local (Edge) Loss
Using Eq. 14, we label edges (A for albedo, S for shading)
based on their local visible–thermal gradients (Fig. 2):
C(x) =
(
A
|r¯Iv| > ✏m, |
r¯IvrIt
kr¯IvkkrItk| > ✏p,
S
|r¯Iv| > ✏m, |
r¯IvrIt
kr¯IvkkrItk| < ✏p,
(16)
where ✏m suppresses textureless regions and ✏p thresholds
the cosine similarity between visible and thermal gradients.
Before computing rIt, we apply Gaussian smoothing to
reduce noise while maintaining gradient consistency.
With the class labels above, we formulate an edge loss
that penalizes albedo gradients at shading-dominant pixels
and vice versa, where ⌦denotes all image pixels:
Ledge(¯⇢, ˆ⌘, C) =
1
|⌦|
h
X
C(x)=S
kr¯⇢(x)k2 +
X
C(x)=A
krˆ⌘(x)k2i
.
(17)
41755


4.2. Non-Local (Point-Pair) Loss
During optimization, we use Poisson disk sampling [5] to
generate random point pairs across the image. Using Eq. 15,
each pair (xi, xj) is assigned a class label based on their
normalized intensity differences δIv and δIt:
P(xi, xj) =
8
>
>
>
<
>
>
>
:
S+
δIv > ✏d, δIt > ✏d,
S−
δIv < −✏d, δIt < −✏d,
A+ δIv > ✏d, δIt < −✏d,
A−δIv < −✏d, δIt > ✏d,
(18)
where δIx = Ix(xi)−Ix(xj)
Zx
with normalization Zx so that
threshold ✏d is relative. The ordinal loss is a hinge-based
formulation that enforces separation beyond a margin "m:
Lord =
1
|P|
X
(xi,xj)
8
>
>
>
<
>
>
>
:
max(ˆ⌘j −ˆ⌘i + "m, 0),
P(xi, xj)=S+,
max(ˆ⌘i −ˆ⌘j + "m, 0),
P(xi, xj)=S−,
max(¯⇢j −¯⇢i + "m, 0),
P(xi, xj)=A+,
max(¯⇢i −¯⇢j + "m, 0),
P(xi, xj)=A−.
(19)
4.3. Regularization using Deep Image Prior
In complex real scenes, thermal noise can corrupt subtle
gradients, and ordinal constraints alone cannot fully deter-
mine absolute albedo or shading values—they only restrict
the solution space. Therefore, we adopt a variant of the
Deep Image Prior [40] to parameterize albedo and shading,
leveraging the inherent architectural prior in a randomly
initialized network for regularization.
We employ a Double-DIP (DDIP) architecture
[16]
with two networks N(zA, ⇥A), N(zS, ⇥S) to parameterize
albedo and shading, respectively. Each uses a convolutional
encoder–decoder with skip connections [40]. ⇥A, ⇥S are
randomly initialized model weights and zA, zS are randomly
sampled input noise vectors. The albedo network outputs
a 3-channel image bounded to [0, 1]3 via a sigmoid activa-
tion, while the shading network predicts a single channel
constrained by a non-negativity penalty. We freeze zA and
zS while only optimizing for ⇥A and ⇥S.
4.4. Optimization
Our complete objective function is as follows.
L(ˆ⇢, ˆ⌘, Iv, It) = kˆ⇢· ˆ⌘−Ivk2+λ1Ledge(¯⇢, ˆ⌘, C(¯Iv, It))+
λ2Lord(¯⇢, ˆ⌘, P(¯Iv, It)),
(20)
where λ1, λ2 > 0 are the respective loss weights. The ther-
mal image is used only for edge or point pair losses, which
operate on the mean albedo. The reconstruction loss is de-
ﬁned on the 3−channel image.
5. VT-Intrinsic Dataset
Existing IID datasets lack thermal modalities, while cur-
rent visible–thermal datasets (e.g., captured from vehicles or
Figure 3. Visible–thermal image pair examples in the VT-Intrinsic
dataset, covering diverse scenes including parks, schools, cathe-
drals, plazas, museums, and various urban streets.
drones) focus on dynamic objects (people, cars) or non-light-
absorption based heat sources (engines, people) that are out
of scope for this work. So, we collected 600 visible–thermal
image pairs (Fig. 3) across diverse stationary scenes under
varying illumination to validate our method.
Imaging System. We co-locate a FLIR Boson thermal
camera (512 ⇥640 resolution, 24◦HFOV, 50mK NEDT)
with an IDS UI-3130 color camera (600 ⇥800 resolution,
27◦HFOV) using a gold dichroic mirror (BSP-DI-25-2). For
distant outdoor scenes, the cameras are placed side by side
and aligned via homography.
Data Acquisition and Preprocessing. We captured 20
exposure-bracketed color images with geometrically spaced
exposure times and merged them into a linear HDR im-
age [13] after edge-aware demosaicing in OpenCV. Five
frames were averaged to suppress sensor noise. The visible
HDR and thermal images were aligned via homography.
Our dataset contributes in two key aspects: (i) a large
collection of high-quality real-world outdoor images with
diverse albedo–shading combinations (vs. predominantly in-
door/synthetic prior datasets); (ii) abundant pseudo-ground-
truth albedo and shading ordinalities for training and eval-
uation. As shown in Sec. 6.2.1, the thermal image pro-
duces reliable albedo/shading ordinalities across arbitrary
pixel pairs—previously only available in limited form due
to costly human labeling (IIW [5]).
6. Experiments
Datasets: As typical IID datasets lack associated thermal
images, we construct the VT-Intrinsic dataset for qualitative
evaluation. Obtaining ground truth albedo and shading for
real-world scenes is impractical. Therefore, for quantitative
evaluation, we collected images of a color chart under differ-
ent illuminations: white LED light, incandescent bulb and
sunlight. We also evaluate on the JoLHT-Video dataset [34],
which contains four scenes of a color chart under varied illu-
minations and a Painted-Mask scene. In the supplementary,
we evaluate on the MIT-Intrinsics [19] dataset by simulating
an ideal thermal image using their pseudo-ground truth.
41756


Figure 4. Results on a color-chart scene in JoLHT-Video dataset. Our method recovers the smooth line-light shading across the color chart.
Figure 5. Results on Painted-Mask scene in JoLHT-Video dataset. Baselines show albedo texture in shading or highlight artifacts in albedo.
Metrics: We use the scale-invariant Mean Square Error
(si-MSE) to evaluate albedo and shading quantitatively.
Baselines: We compare with state-of-the-art methods
in three categories.
Learning-based:
Diffusion-based
IntrinsicDiffusion [30] and RGB$X [43], CNN-based
Intrinsic-v1 [6] and Intrinsic-v2 [7], and Transformer-
based CRefNet [31]. Physics-based: NIR-Priors [8], re-
quiring a paired NIR image, and JoLHT-Video [34], de-
manding transient thermal video under controlled illu-
mination.
Optimization-based: RGB-Retinex [20] and
Opt-LocalSmooth [37]. IntrinsicDiffusion, RGB$X, and
Intrinsic-v2 output colorful shading, while others grayscale.
6.1. Qualitative Evaluation
Fig. 6 presents comparisons with state-of-the-art baselines
across various scenes. The ﬁrst two cases demonstrate our
ability to remove cast shadows from albedo (e.g., handrail
and lantern shadows), while the next two highlight disentan-
gling albedo texture from shading (e.g., rhino statue texture
and checkerboard pattern). The ﬁnal example is an homage
to the classic Adelson’s Checker-Shadow Illusion [1], where
our method successfully separates the shadowed checker
region from the cylinder shading.
Learning-based baselines often over-smooth albedo and
shading due to strong statistical priors, producing ﬂat grass
shading or overly uniform wall colors. In contrast, our
physics-based approach, guided solely by a single thermal
image, better preserves details such as block-wise albedo
variation, concrete texture, and natural shading gradients.
Fig. 4 and Fig. 5 show results on the JoLHT-Video dataset.
Our method recovers smooth line-light shading comparable
to JoLHT-Video using only a single thermal image, while
other baselines exhibit clear albedo or shading leakage.
6.2. Quantitative Evaluation
6.2.1. Validating Ordinalities
We validated our ordinality theory on a wide range of real-
world materials and scenes via expert annotations, and con-
ﬁrm statistically with a spectral reﬂectance dataset [22] that
invisible component rarely overturn these ordinalities.
Patch Ordinality on Various Materials. The evaluation
included 20 patches from CUReT dataset [10] and com-
mon objects (painted aluminum, plastic, wood, silk, leather,
cloth, plaster, etc.). These patches were placed in different
orientations under artiﬁcial and natural lighting. Experts
conﬁdently labeled 865 ordinalities across patches. Our pre-
diction matched the expert labels with 98.59% accuracy in
sunlight (albedo: 99.37%, shading: 97.01%) and 96.82%
under white-LED (albedo: 94.62%, shading: 100%).
Point-Pair Ordinality on Diverse Scenes. We further evalu-
ated on 100 real-world scenes in VT-Intrinsic dataset (Sec. 5),
spanning materials such as stone, concrete, grass, vegetation,
painted metal, plastic, and wood. Experts labeled the ordi-
nalities in albedo or shading of 20 randomly sampled point
pairs per image using the visible image as reference. Pairs
with small intensity differences were excluded to avoid am-
biguity. Experts conﬁdently labeled 1,063 pairs and found
937 unclear. Ignoring the latter, our theory achieved 98.95%
overall accuracy (albedo: 96.96%, shading: 99.62%), con-
ﬁrming the reliability of thermal-guided ordinal cues. More
details are in the supplementary.
Statistical Robustness to Invisible Spectral Components.
Violations of ordinalities due to invisible reﬂectance are
possible but statistically unlikely. Above we validated or-
dinalities with expert labels for many materials and light-
ing conditions with non-visible components. As a further
41757


Figure 6. Qualitative comparisons to state-of-the-art baselines. The ﬁrst two scenes show how our method removes cast shadows from
albedo (e.g., shadow of handrail in case 1, lanterns in case 2). The next three demonstrate our ability to eliminate albedo texture from
shading (e.g., rhino statue texture in case 3, checkerboard pattern in case 4). But baselines struggle with these challenges, despite their
advantage of pre-training on large datasets, whereas our approach relies solely on physics-based information in a single thermal image.
Baselines often over-smooth albedo and shading (e.g., smooth albedo on detailed ground and walls, ﬂat shading on grass) due to reliance on
priors. Diffusion-based baselines can offer appealing visual quality but sacriﬁce faithfulness (e.g. hallucinated albedo texture on the rhino
statue in case 3). Images are tonemapped for visualization. Key differences are highlighted in bounding boxes. More examples and baselines
appear in the supplementary.
41758


Table 1. Results of si-MSE (#) reported at 10−2 across datasets (Sec. 6.2). Best and second highlighted. Our method surpasses all
learning-based approaches despite using no learned priors and achieves performance comparable to JoLHT-Video, which demands transient
thermal video under controlled illumination. N/A indicates unavailable data, and 7 denotes non-applicability.
Method
Optimization-based
Learning-based
Physics-based (w/ auxiliary sensor)
JoLHT-Video Dataset
Color Chart w/ Different Illumination
Painted Mask
Color Charts
White LED
Incandescent
Sunlight
Albedo
Shading
Albedo
Albedo
Albedo
Albedo
RGB-Retinex [20] (TPAMI’06)
25
0.30
3.4
2.42
2.33
2.73
Opt-LocalSmooth [37] (CVPR’11)
45
0.35
7.1
2.41
4.21
2.04
IntrinsicDiffusion [30] (SIGGRAPH’24)
37
0.25
2.9
4.12
3.33
4.85
RGB$X [43] (SIGGRAPH’24)
30
0.37
2.8
4.07
5.31
4.59
Intrinsic-v2 [7] (ToG’24)
27
0.17
2.8
1.25
4.36
4.17
Intrinsic-v1 [6] (ToG’23)
30
0.21
3.8
1.55
2.72
4.97
CRefNet [31] (TVCG’23)
38
0.23
8.8
1.79
2.29
1.98
NIR-Priors [8] (ICCV’19)
N/A
N/A
N/A
7
2.46
2.08
JoLHT-Video [34] (CVPR’24)
8.4
0.05
2.0
N/A
7
7
Ours
11
0.10
2.7
0.37
1.06
1.19
evaluation, we used the Solar Spectral Irradiance (ASTM-
G173) and 427 materials from USGS Spectral Reﬂectance
dataset [22], and conﬁrmed that the ordinality of absorbed
visible light matches the ordinality of total absorbed light
(including UV and IR) in 94.2% cases out of all 90,951 or
&427
2
'
material pairs. The remaining 5.8% of violations occur
mostly when absorptances are nearly identical.
6.2.2. Validating IID Method
We present evaluations on the color charts under different
illuminations and JoLHT-Video dataset [34], and include in
the supplementary (i) a simulation experiment to validate
ordinality informativeness and (ii) an ablation study.
Color Chart under Different Illuminations. We imaged
a color chart under white LED, incandescent and sunlight.
Tab. 1 shows our method outperforming baselines under
all illuminations. Incandescent and sunlight experiments
demonstrate our robustness to albedo variations even in the
invisible band that inﬂuence absorbed light. In contrast,
physics-based baselines have limited applicability: JoLHT-
Video assumes no invisible lighting component, and NIR-
Priors requires NIR emission absent in white LEDs.
Using JoLHT-Video Dataset.
The dataset [34] includes
four color-chart scenes and a Painted-Mask scene with
pseudo ground-truth obtained following [19], which are con-
siderably challenging due to the strong lighting variations
from line light (Fig. 4, Fig. 5). As shown in Tab. 1, our
method outperforms all learning-based baselines without
pre-trained priors, and achieves performance comparable
to JoLHT-Video [34], which demands stricter conditions of
calibrated transient thermal video and controlled lighting.
7. Limitations and Conclusion
This work explores photometric cues encoded in a single
auxiliary thermal image, and presents physics-based opti-
mization for albedo-shading separation. We showed its ef-
fectiveness on real scenes with a wide range of materials and
Visible
Thermal
Albedo
Shading
Figure 7. Corner cases: 1) Heat from a truck engine, unrelated to
light absorption, elevates the thermal intensity of the road beneath
it. 2) Non-opaque cathedral windows violate the visible image
formation model.. 3) The metallic ﬁre hydrant has low emissivity,
resulting in poor thermal SNR, and exhibits specular highlights that
challenge the common Lambertian assumption in IID.
lighting conditions. However, diffuse reﬂection dominates
in these materials — metals, transparent objects and mirrors
violate the visible image formation model. Our model also
assumes that the heat arises primarily from light absorption
— heat generated otherwise internally (engines, humans) or
externally (hot air blower or ﬁre) is not modeled. It also
does not handle multiple colored illuminations. Finally,
we rely on inexpensive microbolometer thermal cameras
whose quality is lower compared to visible cameras — low
SNR due to insufﬁcient heat generation (overcast skies, dy-
namic objects) can degrade performance. Failure cases are
shown in Fig. 7, with additional analysis on low-light and
non-equilibrium thermal conditions in the supplementary.
Despite these limitations, the improvements demonstrate
the potential to scale supervision for learning algorithms.
We hope our work inspires further exploration of light–heat
interaction in computer vision and graphics.
41759


Acknowledgements
This work was partly supported by NSF grants IIS210723,
and NSF-NIFA AI Institute for Resilient Agriculture. We
are sincerely grateful to Akihiko Oharazawa for his help
with expert annotation, and to Sriram Narayanan and Gaurav
Parmar for their insightful discussions.
References
[1] Edward Adelson.
The checker shadow illusion.
In per-
sci.mit.edu/gallery/checkershadow, 1995. 6
[2] Fanglin Bao, Xueji Wang, Shree Hari Sureshbabu, Gautam
Sreekumar, Liping Yang, Vaneet Aggarwal, Vishnu N. Bod-
deti, and Zubin Jacob. Heat-assisted detection and ranging.
Nature, 619(7971):743–748, 2023. 2
[3] Harry Barrow, J Tenenbaum, A Hanson, and E Riseman.
Recovering intrinsic scene characteristics. Comput. vis. syst,
2(3-26):2, 1978. 1
[4] Harry G Barrow and Jay M Tenenbaum. Recovering intrinsic
scene characteristics from images. Computer Vision Systems,
pages 3–26, 1978. 2
[5] Sean Bell, Kavita Bala, and Noah Snavely. Intrinsic images
in the wild. ACM Trans. on Graphics (SIGGRAPH), 33(4),
2014. 2, 5
[6] Chris Careaga and Ya˘gız Aksoy. Intrinsic image decomposi-
tion via ordinal shading. ACM Trans. Graph., 43(1), 2023. 2,
6, 8
[7] Chris Careaga and Ya˘gız Aksoy. Colorful diffuse intrinsic
image decomposition in the wild. ACM Trans. Graph., 43(6),
2024. 2, 6, 8
[8] Ziang Cheng, Yinqiang Zheng, Shaodi You, and Imari Sato.
Non-local intrinsic decomposition with near-infrared priors.
In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on
computer vision, pages 2521–2530, 2019. 2, 3, 6, 8
[9] Gyeongmin Choe, Srinivasa G. Narasimhan, and In So
Kweon. Simultaneous estimation of near ir brdf and ﬁne-scale
surface geometry. In 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2016. 2, 4
[10] Kristin Dana, Bram Ginneken, Shree Nayar, and Jan Koen-
derink. Reﬂectance and texture of real-world surfaces. ACM
Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 18:1–34, 1999. 6, 2
[11] Partha Das, Sezer Karaoglu, and Theo Gevers. Intrinsic image
decomposition using physics-based cues and cnns. Computer
Vision and Image Understanding, 223:103538, 2022. 2
[12] Aniket Dashpute, Vishwanath Saragadam, Emma Alexan-
der, Florian Willomitzer, Aggelos Katsaggelos, Ashok Veer-
araghavan, and Oliver Cossairt. Thermal spread functions
(tsf): Physics-guided material classiﬁcation. In Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR), pages 1641–1650, 2023. 2
[13] Paul E. Debevec and Jitendra Malik. Recovering high dy-
namic range radiance maps from photographs. SIGGRAPH
97, 1997. 5
[14] Graham D Finlayson, Steven D Hordley, Cheng Lu, and
Mark S Drew. Color constancy at a pixel. Journal of the
Optical Society of America A, 21(8):1453–1458, 2004. 2
[15] Sigmund Fritz. Illuminance and luminance under overcast
skies. J. Opt. Soc. Am., 45(10):820–825, 1955. 2
[16] Yossi Gandelsman, Assaf Shocher, and M. Irani. ”double-
dip”: Unsupervised image decomposition via coupled deep-
image-priors.
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
2018. 2, 5
[17] Elena Garces, Carlos Rodriguez-Pardo, Dan Casas, and Jorge
Lopez-Moreno. A survey on intrinsic images: Delving deep
into lambert and beyond. International Journal of Computer
Vision, 130(3):836–868, 2022. 1
[18] Gevers. Reﬂectance-based classiﬁcation of color edges. In
Proceedings Ninth IEEE International Conference on Com-
puter Vision, pages 856–861. IEEE, 2003. 2, 3
[19] Roger Grosse, Micah K. Johnson, Edward H. Adelson, and
William T. Freeman. Ground truth dataset and baseline eval-
uations for intrinsic image algorithms. In 2009 IEEE 12th
International Conference on Computer Vision, pages 2335–
2342, 2009. 1, 2, 5, 8
[20] Steven D. Hordley, Mark S. Drew, Graham D. Finlayson, and
Cheng Lu. On the Removal of Shadows from Images . IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis & Machine Intelligence, 28
(01):59–68, 2006. 6, 8
[21] Peter Kocsis, Vincent Sitzmann, and Matthias Nießner. Intrin-
sic image diffusion for indoor single-view material estimation.
arXiv preprint arXiv: 2312.12274, 2023. 2
[22] Raymond F. Kokaly, Roger N. Clark, Gregg A. Swayze,
K. Eric Livo, Todd M. Hoefen, Neil C. Pearson, Richard A.
Wise, William M. Benzel, Heather A. Lowers, Ryan L.
Driscoll, and Andrew J. Klein.
USGS Spectral Library
Version 7 Data.
https://doi.org/10.5066/
F7RR1WDJ, 2017. U.S. Geological Survey Data Release.
2, 6, 8
[23] Balazs Kovacs, Sean Bell, Noah Snavely, and Kavita Bala.
Shading annotations in the wild. Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR), 2017. 2
[24] Philipp Krahenbuhl. Free supervision from video games. In
2018 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 2955–2964, 2018. 2
[25] Edwin H Land. The retinex theory of color vision. Scientiﬁc
American, 237(6):108–128, 1977. 2, 3
[26] Zhengqi Li and Noah Snavely. Cgintrinsics: Better intrinsic
image decomposition through physically-based rendering. In
European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), 2018. 2
[27] Zhengqi Li and Noah Snavely. Learning intrinsic image de-
composition from watching the world. In Proceedings of the
IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
pages 9039–9048, 2018. 2
[28] Zhengqin Li, Ting-Wei Yu, Shen Sang, Sarah Wang, Meng
Song, Yuhan Liu, Yu-Ying Yeh, Rui Zhu, Nitesh Gun-
davarapu, Jia Shi, Sai Bi, Hong-Xing Yu, Zexiang Xu, Kalyan
Sunkavalli, Milos Hasan, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and Manmohan
Chandraker. Openrooms: An open framework for photoreal-
istic indoor scene datasets. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), pages 7190–7199, 2021. 2
[29] Yunfei Liu, Yu Li, Shaodi You, and Feng Lu. Unsupervised
learning for intrinsic image decomposition from a single im-
41760


age. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition, pages 3248–3257, 2020. 2
[30] Jundan Luo, Duygu Ceylan, Jae Shin Yoon, Nanxuan Zhao,
Julien Philip, Anna Fr¨uhst¨uck, Wenbin Li, Christian Richardt,
and Tuanfeng Wang. Intrinsicdiffusion: Joint intrinsic layers
from latent diffusion models. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2024
Conference Papers, New York, NY, USA, 2024. Association
for Computing Machinery. 2, 6, 8, 1
[31] Jundan Luo, Nanxuan Zhao, Wenbin Li, and Christian
Richardt. Crefnet: Learning consistent reﬂectance estimation
with a decoder-sharing transformer. IEEE Transactions on Vi-
sualization and Computer Graphics, 30(9):6407–6420, 2024.
6, 8
[32] Yasuto Nagase, Takahiro Kushida, Kenichiro Tanaka, Takuya
Funatomi, and Yasuhiro Mukaigawa. Shape from thermal
radiation: Passive ranging using multi-spectral lwir measure-
ments. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pages 12661–
12671, 2022. 2
[33] Sriram Narayanan, Mani Ramanagopal, Mark Sheinin,
Aswin C Sankaranarayanan, and Srinivasa G Narasimhan.
Shape from heat conduction. In European Conference on
Computer Vision, pages 426–444. Springer, 2024. 2
[34] Mani Ramanagopal, Sriram Narayanan, Aswin C. Sankara-
narayanan, and Srinivasa G. Narasimhan. A theory of joint
light and heat transport for lambertian scenes. In Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR), pages 11924–11933, 2024. 2, 3, 5, 6, 8
[35] Mike Roberts, Jason Ramapuram, Anurag Ranjan, Atulit Ku-
mar, Miguel Angel Bautista, Nathan Paczan, Russ Webb, and
Joshua M. Susskind. Hypersim: A photorealistic synthetic
dataset for holistic indoor scene understanding. In Proceed-
ings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
Vision (ICCV), pages 10912–10922, 2021. 2
[36] Shogo Sato, Yasuhiro Yao, Taiga Yoshida, Takuhiro Kaneko,
Shingo Ando, and Jun Shimamura. Unsupervised intrinsic
image decomposition with lidar intensity. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 13466–13475, 2023. 3
[37] Jianbing Shen, Xiaoshan Yang, Yunde Jia, and Xuelong Li.
Intrinsic images using optimization. In CVPR 2011, pages
3481–3487, 2011. 2, 6, 8
[38] Roger Shepard. Mind sights: Original visual illusions, ambi-
guities, and other anomalies, with a commentary on the play
of mind in perception and art. 1990. 3
[39] Kenichiro Tanaka, Nobuhiro Ikeya, Tsuyoshi Takatani, Hi-
royuki Kubo, Takuya Funatomi, Vijay Ravi, Achuta Kadambi,
and Yasuhiro Mukaigawa. Time-resolved far infrared light
transport decomposition for thermal photometric stereo. IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence,
43(6):2075–2085, 2021. 2
[40] Dmitry Ulyanov, Andrea Vedaldi, and Victor Lempitsky.
Deep image prior. International Journal of Computer Vision,
128:1867–1888, 2020. 5
[41] Michael Vollmer and Klaus-Peter Mollmann. Fundamentals
of Infrared Thermal Imaging, chapter 1, pages 1–106. John
Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 2017. 4
[42] Jiaye Wu, Sanjoy Chowdhury, Hariharmano Shanmugaraja,
David Jacobs, and Soumyadip Sengupta. Measured albedo in
the wild: Filling the gap in intrinsics evaluation. International
Conference on Computational Photography, 2023. 1, 2
[43] Zheng Zeng, Valentin Deschaintre, Iliyan Georgiev, Yannick
Hold-Geoffroy, Yiwei Hu, Fujun Luan, Ling-Qi Yan, and
Miloˇs Haˇsan. Rgb x: Image decomposition and synthesis
using material- and lighting-aware diffusion models. In ACM
SIGGRAPH 2024 Conference Papers, New York, NY, USA,
2024. Association for Computing Machinery. 2, 6, 8
[44] Daniel Zoran, Phillip Isola, Dilip Krishnan, and William T.
Freeman. Learning ordinal relationships for mid-level vision.
In 2015 IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision
(ICCV), pages 388–396, 2015. 2
41761
